---
title: The Power of Planning Ahead
author: Michael Frid
date: 6-10-2022
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dbopxlpuy/image/upload/c_scale,f_auto,q_auto,w_800/v1652975268/Articles/vue_sgpndn.jpg
tags: ["Dev"]
slug: 2022-6-10
---

## The Never Ending Cycle

Most of you are probably familiar with what I have termed, the "Never Ending Cycle of Planning". It begins oh so promisingly, and quickly the excitement takes over and you begin to work, ignoring the need for trully fleshed out mock-ups or detailed flowcharts. I personally find myself falling for this time and time again, and by the time one realizes that they didn't plan properly for the task at hand, they are in too deep and have to keep plowing ahead without a properly constructed plan.

## What Do You Do?

Funnily enough, I have found that the best way to start planning is in fact, with a good plan. To simplify the proccess, I have created a 5-step system which allows me to plan out all the nessesary parts of my project, while keeping the plan malleable and open to changes when the need for them inevitably comes. The system is as follows:

### Step 1: "What Do I Want?"

This step is arguably the most important, which is why it goes first. By reflecting on the project at hand, and truly considering, "What do I want?" I am able to envision the project as a whole, in a sort-of Big Picture way. I highly reccomend writing down, even just as a bulleted list, the features or components that you envision in this step.

### Step 2: "What Do I Need?"

This step is almost as important as step 1, and for some projects, might even superceed it in importance. This step is also a Big Picture approach, and it focuses on how the project will fullfil the requirements set forth, either by an assignment or by way of a functional requirement for production. Similarly to the previous step, it is important to jot down the thoughts that come from this, as they will come in handy in later steps.

### Step 3: "How will I do it?"

This step revolves around a question that plagued me on the onset of my first serious, large project, and one that I constantly must deal with as I question my own decision making on any project of any size. As you become familiar with more and more technologies and frameworks to create projects, you have more and more decisions to make. Choosing a tech stack is a key step, and one that you must get right, for making a mistake could cost you greatly. Do you want to use Vue, or React, or maybe even Angular or Svelte? Do you want to use MongoDB, or Firebase, or maybe neither? All these decisions must be made, and its important to make them while as informed as possible. I highly reccomend looking into all the popular frameworks and doing one's best to understand all the features as well as their individual pros and cons. This is where the lists, which you created earlier in the process, start to come in handy. By understanding which features you want to incorporate into your project you are able to make wiser and more informed decisions about your Tech Stack. Another factor to keep in mind is that of your team. If this is a solo project, where the only developer you need to keep in mind is you, that simlifies the proccess a bit, but if you are working in a team, any choice must be made with the group in mind. Are you going to choose something that everyone is familiar with, or are you going to choose a framework that some, or all, the team members must learn to use? These are all questions that need answering, and this step is where it makes the most sense to do it.

### Step 4: "How will it work?"

The first three steps were a lot of thinking, with the only writing were jotting down lists of features or technologies. Starting with step 4, we begin making functional progress and delving deeper and with a bit more detail. Flowcharting is something I wasn't particularly familiar with when I started my FullStack project, and it showed. I was doing a lot of planning on the fly, which is the opposite of how you want to plan. Personally, I like Lucidchart because it makes it simple to design flowcharts as well as to export finished products. 

### Step 5: "What will it look like?"

The final step is not last becuase of lack of importance, but simply due to the fact that it requires all the others to be done in order to complete it fully. Mockups are key to any project, because they are the final design prior to begining production. This is when you make choices such as color theme or css transitions. Mockups allow the developer to visualize their site prior to ever starting to code. All the previous steps combine themselves into a magnificient finale, and one that I have consitently done poorly at. For myself, I have found that one of the key steps for creating a good mockup is patience. You may be tempted to rush forward and start coding, but in the long run it is incredibly rewarding to sit down and plan, even the minor details, so that once the coding starts you are armed with a good plan.
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>

Thank you, <br/>
Michael Frid