---
title: CS Fundamental Analogies Part 1  -Data Types 
author: Michael Whalen
date: 2023-01-06
tags: ["Education"]
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dbopxlpuy/image/upload/c_scale,f_auto,q_auto,w_800/v1650996019/Articles/joanna-kosinska-LAaSoL0LrYs-unsplash_sbedkc.jpg
slug: "2023-01-06" 
---

## Importance of Understanding Data Types
Data types in programming and in the real world are important to understand in order to create logical statements. The spirit behind the comparison between apples and oranges is a good anology for the importance of data structures and types in CS. 

While apples and oranges are both fruit and their similarities may make this anology a little less frutiful then I would like...the spirit of their comparison is important for CS. Simply put, comparing "things" in programming that are dissimilar does not work. I would never compared my can of Soda to a book I am reading and certainly would not make decisions about my day based on comparing a can of soda and a book. 

While this example may seem extreme that is essentially what we are doing in Python, JavaScript etc. when we compare "1" and 1. These 2 different data types can have very different and real consequences in our applications if we do not understand how "1", 1 and True differ from each other. This is why TypeScript has seen a major uptick in usage and has higher satisfaction when compared with JavaScript. 

## Strings
Strings are list of characters. It's tempting to consider a string to be "words" in their entirety but that is not exactly true. Each individual character in the word "test" is stored in memory as part of a "list" of characters in the same location. 

Think of a string like this. A string is an essay but each character in that essay. is stored sequentially in the memory of the computer. So a sentence like "See spot run" is stored more like

```Python
["s"]["e"]["e"]["s"]["p"]["o"]["t"]["r"]["u"]["n"]

```
It's important to keep this in mind as many languages allow to manipulate these strings much in the same way we can manipulate a list/array/slice etc. 

## Integers
Integers or Numbers are exactly what they sound like. Some languages use floats (numbers with decimals). Knowing that the number 1 is different than the string "1" is important. For example, we stated earlier that string can be like a real world essay. It could be news article or it could be us talking to each other. 

## Comparing Strings and Integers
None of those examples can be put into a simple calculator though. A caluclator expects one real world data type. A number. The number 1 in your calculator is very different than the number 1 you wrote in an essay or email. While both visually look the same you immediately understand how they are different and used different. You would never directly compare anything in an essay with something output from a calculator. 

This is the same in CS. In JavaScript we may opt to record user input and sort our search results by a year. The user can type in 2020 as a cut off for finding a recent movie perhaps. 

By default the user's input will be a string and we would more than likely have years for books stored as an integer in our database. Without realizing that the user input is a string by default our search results will always return the wrong information as "2020" is not the same as 2020 in our database. This example highlights the need to understand datatypes as our apples and oranges can lead to bugs in our codebase and unintended consequences. 
